Add technical documentation for allocation (#1579)
Deltares/Ribasim: docs/dev/allocation.qmd

---
title: "Allocation"
---
# Overview of allocation implementation
In this document, the allocation workflow is explained. Below is an overview of it.

> ```{mermaid}

Author: This loop is made based on `update_allocation` functions. The looping over priorities is only one of functions called in step `collect_demand` and `allocate`. and the interaction with physical layer is a part of looping priorities. I agree that they are very important steps, maybe to describ it with words below instead of adding them to the graph.

flowchart TD
    subgraph update_allocation
        direction TB
        G[update mean flows]-->E[collect demand]
        E-->F[allocate]
    end
    style update_allocation fill:#9ff
    C(Begin)-->A[Initialization allocation]
    A--> update_allocation --> H[\end of time?\]
    H--> |No| update_allocation
    H --> |Yes| D(End)
```

If allocation is used in a model, [Allocation structs](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/dev/allocation.html#the-allocation-struct) are created.

> The allocation struct stores the data that is needed for the calculations and the results of the calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The allocation struct stores the data that is needed for the calculations including the calculation results.
```

In allocation, optimization is an essential part.

> The JuMP model is used to model and solve the optimization problems that come up in allocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JuMP is used to model and solve the optimization problems that are defined by allocation.
```

The [AllocationModel struct](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/dev/allocation.html#the-allocation-struct) is used for constructing the JuMP model.
When an instance of `AllocationModel` is created, a JuMP optimization model is defined and initialized in the instance.
More details on how allocation interacts with `JuMP.jl` is explained [here](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/dev/allocation.html#jump.jl-problem-interaction).

After initialization, as the simulation starts, the allocation problem is solved and updated after every allocation timestep (which is specified in the TOML).

> In each iteration, the data needed for comuptation is updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In each iteration, the data needed for computation is updated.
```
Which Iteration ? Do you mean every allocation timestep, or every priority iteration ? Be more specific.
Also 'the data needed' is very vague, certainly given the next sentence that 'the parameters'are updated. Be more specific.
Are you trying to tell the following in this sentence and the next one ?
With every allocation timestep a new optimization problem is formulated and solved, using the latest available (simulation) model conditions and forcing and demand predictions.

|mean_realized_flows  | Dict{Tuple{NodeID, NodeID}, Float64}   | Flows averaged over Δt_allocation over edges that realize a demand|
|record_demand      |      | A record of demands and allocated flows for nodes that have these|
|record_flow       |       | A record of all flows computed by allocation optimization, eventually saved to output file|

## The `AllocationModel` struct

The `AllocationModel` struct has all the data that is needed for the JuMP optimization problem.

|field     | type              |  description|
|------------  | -------- |---------------------------------------- |
|subnetwork_id |Int32 |The ID of this allocation network|
|capacity | JuMP.Containers.SparseAxisArray | The capacity per edge of the allocation network, as constrained by nodes that have a max_flow_rate|
|problem | JuMP.Model | The JuMP.jl model for solving the allocation problem|
|Δt_allocation | Float64 | The time interval between consecutive allocation solves   |

## `JuMP.jl` problem interaction
When working with optimization problems using JuMP, there are three fundamental components that need to be defined:

> - Optimization variables: These are the [variables](https://jump.dev/JuMP.jl/stable/api/JuMP/#@constraints) that are optimized in the optimization problem in allocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Optimization variables: These are the [variables](https://jump.dev/JuMP.jl/stable/api/JuMP/#@constraints) that are optimized in the allocation problem formulation.
```

They are defined using the [`@constraint`](https://jump.dev/JuMP.jl/stable/api/JuMP/#@constraints) macro.
The definition of the edge capacity constraints is shown in section [below](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/dev/allocation.html#setting-the-constraints-and-capacities).
`add_constraints_...` functions are used to [add constraints](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/dev/allocation.html#setting-up-initial-optimization-constraints) to the optimization problem.
The [initial value of the constraints](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/dev/allocation.html#setting-the-constraints-and-capacities) is set in the function `set_initial_values_...`.
During the iteration, the constraints are updated based on the current state of the allocation network.
When [looping over priorities](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/dev/allocation.html#updating-capacities), the constraints are updated by the function `adjust_...`.

- Objective function: This is the function that sets the objective of the optimization problem.
It is defined using the [`@objective`](https://jump.dev/JuMP.jl/stable/api/JuMP/#@objective) macro.

> The functions `JuMP.normalized_rhs` and `JuMP.set_normalized_rhs` are used to read and write the constant right hand side of constriants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The functions `JuMP.normalized_rhs` and `JuMP.set_normalized_rhs` are used to read and write the constant right hand side of constraints.
```

For example, to update the capacity of one of the edges, `JuMP.normalized_rhs` moves all the constants to the right-hand sides and all variables to the left-hand side and `JuMP.set_normalized_rhs` sets the new right-hand-side value.
```julia
JuMP.set_normalized_rhs(
    constraints_capacity[edge_id],
    JuMP.normalized_rhs(constraints_capacity[edge_id]) - JuMP.value(F[edge_id]),
)
```

Some JuMP data structures are used to store intermediate or result data. For more information, see [JuMP API](https://jump.dev/JuMP.jl/stable/api/JuMP/).

# Initialization
Initialization of the allocation data structures happens in `allocation_init.jl`. Below the steps of allocation problem initialization are explained.

> For each subnetwork, an allocation problem is made, which is stored in the `allocation_models` field mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each subnetwork, an allocation problem is formulated, which is stored in the `allocation_models` field mentioned above.
```

## Data processing
### Deriving edge capacities

> Edge capacities are important constraints in the optimization problem. Obtaining the capacities of all the flow edges in the subnetworks. The capacity of an edge is given by the smallest `max_flow_rate` of the nodes connected to the edges if these nodes have such a value. The capacities are stored in a `SparseArray` object from `JuMP.jl` called `capacities`, indexed by a tuple of node IDs.

Reviewer: the following sentence is not correct grammar. I do not understand what is meant. Obtaining the capacities of all the flow edges in the subnetworks.

Take `add_constraints_user_source` as an example, the nodes that are relevant for the constraints are added to the optimization problem by calling JuMP.\@constraint.

```julia
node_ids_user = [node_id for node_id in node_ids if node_id.type == NodeType.UserDemand]

problem[:source_user] = JuMP.@constraint(
    problem,
    [node_id = node_ids_user],
    F[(node_id, outflow_id(graph, node_id))] <= 0.0,
    base_name = "source_user"
)
```

# Optimization
The initialization and iteration of the optimization problems are implemented in `allocation_optim.jl`.

## Preparing the optimization problem
### Setting up the objective function
The optimization objective is the sum of three quadratic error terms.
The quadratic terms are defined with `add_objective_term` function.

In `set_objective_priority`, it sets the objective function for a given priority.
First, it treats the subnetworks as user demand nodes and adds the quadratic terms of the main network.
Then it loops over all the edges in allocation.
Based on the type of the node that the edge is pointing to (user demand or flow demand), it adds the corresponding quadratic terms.

> Finally, it does the same to the edges that start from a level demand node.

Author: But we currently only have one type which is quadratic

The [AllocationModel struct](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/dev/allocation.html#the-allocation-struct) is used for constructing the JuMP model.
When an instance of `AllocationModel` is created, a JuMP optimization model is defined and initialized in the instance.
More details on how allocation interacts with `JuMP.jl` is explained [here](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/dev/allocation.html#jump.jl-problem-interaction).

After initialization, as the simulation starts, the allocation problem is solved and updated after every allocation timestep (which is specified in the TOML).
With every allocation timestep a new optimization problem is formulated and solved, using the latest available (simulation) model conditions and forcing and demand predictions.

The update of allocation (`update_allocation`) is repeating and spread into three parts:

- Updating the mean flows. The mean flow data is only used only for output, not used by any internal functions.
- ["Collect demand"](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/concept/allocation.html#the-high-level-algorithm). This step initialize and solve the optimization problems that collects the demand from the subnetworks.

> - ["Allocate"](https://deltares.github.io/Ribasim/concept/allocation.html#the-high-level-algorithm). This step solves the optimization problems that allocates the demand to the subnetworks.

Reviewer 2: For the main network this step allocates to the subnetworks (and demand nodes that are in the main network). For the subnetwork this step allocates to the demand nodes.

It is defined using the [`@objective`](https://jump.dev/JuMP.jl/stable/api/JuMP/#@objective) macro.

The functions `JuMP.normalized_rhs` and `JuMP.set_normalized_rhs` are used to read and write the constant right hand side of constraints.

For example, to update the capacity of one of the edges, `JuMP.normalized_rhs` moves all the constants to the right-hand sides and all variables to the left-hand side and `JuMP.set_normalized_rhs` sets the new right-hand-side value.
```julia
JuMP.set_normalized_rhs(
    constraints_capacity[edge_id],
    JuMP.normalized_rhs(constraints_capacity[edge_id]) - JuMP.value(F[edge_id]),
)
```

Some JuMP data structures are used to store intermediate or result data. For more information, see [JuMP API](https://jump.dev/JuMP.jl/stable/api/JuMP/).

# Initialization
Initialization of the allocation data structures happens in `allocation_init.jl`. Below the steps of allocation problem initialization are explained.

For each subnetwork, an allocation problem is formulated, which is stored in the `allocation_models` field mentioned above.

## Data processing
### Deriving edge capacities

> Edge capacities are important constraints in the optimization problem. They set the limit for the flows between the edges. Therefore, the capacities of all the flow edges in the subnetworks are obtained. The capacity of an edge is given by the smallest `max_flow_rate` of the nodes connected to the edges if these nodes have such a value. The capacities are stored in a `SparseArray` object from `JuMP.jl` called `capacities`, indexed by a tuple of node IDs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Edge capacities are important constraints in the optimization problem. They set the limit for the flows between the nodes. Therefore, the capacities of all the flow edges in the subnetworks are obtained. The capacity of an edge is given by the smallest `max_flow_rate` of the nodes connected to the edges if these nodes have such a value. The capacities are stored in a `SparseArray` object from `JuMP.jl` called `capacities`, indexed by a tuple of node IDs.
```

### Setting up initial optimization constraints
All the variables are greater and equal to 0. This is set when the variables are added to the optimization problem.

Other constraints are `capacity`, `source_user`, `source`, `flow_conservation`, `fractional_flow`, `basin_outflow`, `flow_buffer_outflow` and `flow_demand_outflow`.

For each set of constraints, a function named `add_constrains_[constraints name]` is created.

Take `add_constraints_user_source` as an example, the nodes that are relevant for the constraints are added to the optimization problem by calling JuMP.\@constraint.

```julia
node_ids_user = [node_id for node_id in node_ids if node_id.type == NodeType.UserDemand]

problem[:source_user] = JuMP.@constraint(
    problem,
    [node_id = node_ids_user],
    F[(node_id, outflow_id(graph, node_id))] <= 0.0,
    base_name = "source_user"
)
```

# Optimization
Initialization of the data structure is in `allocation_init.jl`, and updating, running and reading the results is in `allocation_optim.jl`.

## Preparing the optimization problem
### Setting up the objective function
The optimization objective is the sum of three quadratic error terms.

> The quadratic terms are defined with `add_objective_term` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The quadratic terms are defined with the `add_objective_term` function.
```suggestion
The quadratic terms are defined with `add_objective_term` function.
```
```

In `set_objective_priority`, it sets the objective function for a given priority with the following steps:

> - First, it treats the subnetworks as user demand nodes and adds the quadratic terms of the main network.

Reviewer 2: It must be made clear here that an optimization problem is either for the main network or for a subnetwork. Only if the optimization is for the main network do you have these terms for the subnetworks as user demand nodes

- Then it loops over all the edges in allocation.
- Based on the type of the node that the edge is pointing to (user demand or flow demand), it adds the corresponding quadratic terms.
- Finally, it does the same to the edges that start from a level demand node.

### Setting the constraints and capacities
In the function `set_initial_values`, the following capacities and demands are initialized:

- Source capacities come from the physical layer
- Edge capacities derived from the maximum capacities between the connected nodes
- Basin capacities
- Buffer capacities
- User demands fractional return flow

> - Demands either come from the Ribasim model or are set via the BMI

Reviewer 2: Sources of information:
- Basin capacities come from the disk of water above the max level set by a level demand node
- Buffer capacities and user demand return flow start at 0

set_initial_capacities_basin!(allocation_model, p, u, t)
set_initial_capacities_buffer!(allocation_model)
set_initial_capacities_returnflow!(allocation_model)

set_initial_demands_user!(allocation_model, p, t)
set_initial_demands_level!(allocation_model, u, p, t)
set_initial_demands_flow!(allocation_model, p, t)
```

These capacities determine the constraints of the optimization problem.
Take `set_initial_capacities_source` as an example, the right-hand-side values of the `source_constraints` are set to the `source_capacity`.

```julia
for edge_metadata in values(graph.edge_data)
    (; edge) = edge_metadata
    if graph[edge...].subnetwork_id_source == subnetwork_id
        # If it is a source edge for this allocation problem
        if edge ∉ main_network_source_edges
            # Reset the source to the averaged flow over the last allocation period
            source_capacity = mean_input_flows[edge][]
            JuMP.set_normalized_rhs(
                source_constraints[edge],
                # It is assumed that the allocation procedure does not have to be differentiated.
                source_capacity,
            )
        end
    end
end
```

> Apart from the `set_initial_` function above, capacities of `inlet` are the allocated capacities from the main network to the subnetworks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apart from the `set_initial_*` function above, capacities of `inlet` are the allocated capacities from the main network to the subnetworks.
```

Source constraints will be adapted based on the optimization type.
This function is called separately and thus not part of the `set_initial_values`.

## Looping over priorities
### Updating capacities

> While optimizing a given priority, the function `set_capacities_flow_demand_outflow` updates the constraints `flow_demand_outflow`.

Reviewer 2: Some additional information about the buffer for nodes with a flow demand:
- At priorities where there is no flow demand, flow can go freely trough the node. When there is flow demand, flow is directed into the buffer. This is to make sure that flow can go to the node with the flow demand, even though the flow might have nowhere to go after that node.

If the current priority is the same as the priority of the flow demand, constraints will be infinite, otherwise 0.

The optimization objective function is updated based on the new demands and the given priority.

If a solution is found by the solver, the allocation result will be updated. And it will be [saved](allocation.qmd#output-data), so the [physical layer](allocation.qmd#communicating-to-the-physical-layer) can make use of it.

Lastly, capacities and demands are updated, as shown below:

```julia
adjust_capacities_source!(allocation_model)
adjust_capacities_edge!(allocation_model)
adjust_capacities_basin!(allocation_model)
adjust_capacities_buffer!(allocation_model)
adjust_capacities_returnflow!(allocation_model, p)

for parameter in propertynames(p)
    demand_node = getfield(p, parameter)
    if demand_node isa AbstractDemandNode
        adjust_demands!(allocation_model, p, priority_idx, demand_node)
    end
end
```

## Output data

> Function `save_demands_and_allocations` saves the demand and the allocated value per demand node. And function `save_allocation_flows` saves the optimized flows over the edges in the subnetwork.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The function `save_demands_and_allocations` saves the demand and the allocated value per demand node. And function `save_allocation_flows` saves the optimized flows over the edges in the subnetwork.
```
